So when we do a column organization, then
we come instantly to the fact that we can
see how to minimize the access to memory.
This can be done first by only accessing the
columns by need and second when we look into
columns we can do something with them that
we couldn’t do with a normal disk-based
database, we couldn’t do an attribute-based
compression in a row database on disk, but
we can do a column-based compression in memory.
This is what we will look at in one example
now and then you get a feeling of what we
can achieve and why this column concept becomes
superior.
So we learned already that main memory access
is the bottleneck and we want to reduce the
overall main memory access and one way is
to reduce the bits we need to store the information
which is in a table.
So we want to introduce data compression and
we want to do this in a way that the operations
that we do on a table can be done in a compressed
form. For the ones who know row-based compression
- at least the one SAP has used in the last
forty years - do not allow execution in a
compressed form. So before anything could
happen on an attribute in tuple, the tuple
had to be decompressed.
Our example is the world population. 8 billion
humans, probably we have 200 Bytes per person,
and in the old days I had the number of bytes
needed by multiplying 8 billion by 200, 1.6
TB. Now we want to see how this comes down
when we start working on the data.
We have here our sample table. Each tuple
has a record ID [recID]. This is the relative
position in the table. And then we have the
attributes. Now we start a concept which is
called Dictionary Encoding.
We take now an individual column. Let’s
take the first name column, and reorganize
the data in a vector which is pointing into
a dictionary. In there we keep the names,
the actual instance, John, Mary, Jane, Peter,
and in this dictionary we have a relative
position of the name which is an integer,
and use the integer then in the actual column.
So we replace the character string “John”
by an integer pointing to a character string.
So we have 8 billion people with only 5 million
first names. So for these we need only 23
bits to encode them. So we do a little design
assessment here - how many bytes do we need
for first names? There are countries where
first names are pretty extended, we have nobody
from India here, but there are others in the
world. So let us take 23 bits instead of 20
bytes
and a dictionary. So we get all the distinct
values of the first names into a dictionary,
we sort the dictionary, then every name has
a position: John is on position 23, Mary is
on 24. This is an integer of the length of
23 bits and we store this integer value, called
valueID, in the attribute vector for first
name. The compression is now 23 bits, probably
we take 24 bits, this is three bytes and we
had 20 bytes before, so we have a compression
from twenty to three plus the dictionary.
So we saved 17 bytes and times 8 billion,
this is quite a lot. Always remember if we
reduce that amount of space we need to store
the information, we increase the speed of
looking through all these information. In
this case we increase the scan of first names
already by roughly a factor seven. Without
doing anything the full column scan speed
is now seven times faster than in a database
which stores the characters.
When we do this with gender, then it becomes
even more obvious. For gender we need only
one bit instead of “m” and “f”, so
we compress now from eight bits to one, factor
eight. We have a bit vector which is 8 billion
bits long, that is one billion characters,
and we want to scan through the vector male/female,
we have got to check for bit on and off, then
we can achieve a very fast scan speed.
So with the dictionary there is a design decision
very early on, to keep the dictionary sorted.
This is good for Inserts, this is good for
Joins. If the dictionaries are sorted we can
do binary search on top of the dictionaries,
so we can find the distinct value in log n.
We need this for the speed of transferring
incoming character-based tuples into dictionary-encoded
tuples.
The dictionary entries themselves can be compressed
and we will see at least one compression technique
later. The compression rate depends on the
cardinality of a column. How many different
values are in a column? If we have only two
different values, like male and female, in
a column, then I can compress this down to
one bit, and if I use the byte as before this
is eight to one; in the case of first names
probably like seven to one.
There are two different definitions here for
cardinality. When we talk about the cardinality
of a table then it is just the number
of tuples in the relation, if we don’t have
duplicates in it. A column cardinality is
defined as the number of distinct values in
a column, so the cardinality of the gender
column is very low. The column with the highest
cardinality here - that’s a trick question.
Countries - it’s only 200, currencies is
even less. Cities is a good one - one million
only. So you get a feeling how the actual
character description of real world objects
are abstract. The cardinality of those objects
is relatively small and when we use this for
encoding we can achieve significant compression
rates.
By the way this was done in the old days in
building Enterprise Systems a lot, when you
look at an older SAP system there is a lot
of coding, so there is not a country text
in a customer record, there is a country code
pointing to a country. So this type of dictionary
encoding was introduced lots of years ago
in Enterprise Computing, sometimes painful,
because you always have to translate it back
and if you want to show where 007 lives, you
have to go into 007’s country code, and
from there into the country table, and then
you find out he comes from Great Britain.
Systems which were developed later very often
didn’t do this, systems which came from
the PC world mainly worked on the original
value strings, so the country is a field and
there is a country coded. You might have the
same country several times misspelled, so
there are some kinds of application issues.
What we do here is we automatically code all
columns and compress them as much as we can
on bits. The nice thing is we don’t have
to work on byte level anymore, because with
the modern Intel CPUs - and I think others
are following - we have got more instructions
where we can shift the 64 bits back and forth
and we can do all kinds of bit oriented operations
at a very high speed.
So we have a sorted dictionary, we have this,
and we have a compression rate. So the first
name is five million, the last name is eight
million, the gender two, city one million,
country 200, birthday 40,000. So just to get
a feeling, we have the entropy and we have
an item size, we even have here 49 bytes,
so I should have looked to this first. With
a dictionary we can compress this significantly.
Here are the compression rates between plain
and dictionary compression on the right hand
side.
When we look at the compression, at this point
we can already say that in large enterprise
tables coming from an SAP system - I have
in mind now a table with 500 attributes from
sales - and we have learned already, that
probably only 20 percent of the attributes
have been used in one single installation.
That means that 400 fields are not populated,
400 columns are all empty. What does a database
do with a column that is empty? There is no
column. So the first compression we get is
that empty columns are not being stored. They
are known to the system in the meta data,
there is probably a little management information
that the column is empty, and we can use that
in the system. Definitely it doesn’t cost
space and definitely we do not need to search
columns which are not populated. The second
is, we compress the remaining columns and
the compression rate we see here, if the average
compression is factor five this is probably
rule of thumb. So compression to the factor
five of populated data and compression of
close to 100 percent for non-populated data.
If you found out the amount of population
for a given table - that is just a little
program running and should be a feature of
the system management tools, I think it is
- then we can already predict the compression
before we ever do something with a table.
So knowing the distinct values and the size
of the table, we can calculate the populated
ones and the unpopulated ones you don’t
have to calculate. If we want to compare with
the plain table, how it probably comes into
the system, so all fields populated, even
with the default values, we have the compression
factor. This is various from five, which is
typically minimum - these are tables where
all attributes are populated, to factor 50
- these are tables in SAP financials - and
it varies in between. Taking any type of table,
companies have set up then factor ten is probably
a very good compression factor, so if somebody
says “we have today a ten TB table space
and we do not compress the data - this is
for example in MaxDB or in DB2 - then we need
only one TB in this database.